Project Proposal

NAMES: 
Sophia Ashraf
Dylan Oquendo
Karun Mokha
Jake Kondo
Ekrem Ersoz


RESEARCH QUESTION: What is your research question? Include the specific question you're setting out to answer. This question should be specific, answerable with data, and clear. A general question with specific subquestions is permitted. (1-2 sentences)

Did mental health during Covid 19 have an effect on pregnancy outcomes?

Sub Questions:
Normal time data (overall population):
Analyze pregnancy outcomes data from periods before the COVID-19 pandemic as a baseline. This will help establish what "normal" outcomes look like, against which pandemic-era outcomes can be compared.
Was it related to mental health:
Investigate whether changes in pregnancy outcomes during the COVID-19 pandemic correlate with reported changes in mental health statistics. This involves collecting data on mental health issues among pregnant individuals during the pandemic and comparing these with pregnancy outcomes.
How did these relate to large events (e.g., vaccines)? Did that change anything…:
Examine the timeline of major Covid-19-related events, such as lockdowns, infection waves, and the introduction of vaccines, and analyze their impact on mental health and pregnancy outcomes. This could involve comparing pregnancy outcomes and mental health data before and after such events to identify any significant changes or trends.



BACKGROUND & PRIOR WORK: This section will present the background and context of your topic and question in a few paragraphs. Include a general introduction to your topic and then describe what information you currently know about the topic after doing your initial research. Include references to other projects who have asked similar questions or approached similar problems. Explain what others have learned in their projects.

Find some relevant prior work, and reference those sources, summarizing what each did and what they learned. Even if you think you have a totally novel question, find the most similar prior work that you can and discuss how it relates to your project.

References can be research publications, but they need not be. Blogs, GitHub repositories, company websites, etc., are all viable references if they are relevant to your project. It must be clear which information comes from which references. (2-3 paragraphs, including at least 2 references)

The impact that COVID-19 had on mental health around the globe has been acknowledged and studied by scientific researchers to examine its effects, particularly on specific “at risk” populations such as pregnant and postpartum women. In fact the World Health Organization (WHO) estimates anxiety and depression prevalence increased 25% globally during the height of the pandemic. A systematic review and meta-analysis conducted by Gayathri Delanerolle, department of Health Care Science at Oxford, titled “The prevalence of mental ill-health in women during pregnancy and after childbirth during the COVID-19 pandemic” found a significant increase in negative mental health outcomes specifically in women who were pregnant and postpartum . They quantified depression, anxiety, and stress, and suggested that the increase of these conditions highlight a need for mental health resources amongst maternal healthcare services, especially during a pandemic as impactful as COVID-19. This research provides a strong empirical context for our group illustrating the vulnerability of pregnant women to negative mental health outcomes during the pandemic. 

For our project, we also want to contextualize maternal stress during pregnancy at times not during a pandemic so we have a measure to compare. An article titled, “Prenatal developmental origins of behavior and mental health: The influence of maternal stress in pregnancy” Van den Bergh et al’s did a review on current research to find that stress during pregnancy cna have long lasting behavioral and mental health affects later in life. This includes affecting fetal development in a variety of ways including hormonal changes and affecting brain development. Overall the article highlights how critical the pregnancy period is for mothers, and how during extra stressful times there could be profound long lasting effects on child development. 

These two studies serve as a foundation for our project as context for stress, and mental health in pregnant and postpartum women with a meta-analysis on mental health during the pandemic, and a systematic review of all current research on maternal stress and child development. Delanerolle et al. 's article found increase in mental health issues amongst pregnant and postpartum women during the pandemic, while Van den Bergh et al’s comprehensive review gave us insight into the origins of prenatal mental health by highlighting cognitive and neurodevelopment dysfunction. . These findings highlight the importance of our research question. Our goal is to examine the relationship between mental health during COVID-19 and pregnancy outcomes, our project aims to contribute to the prior research and understandings of these interactions and serve to suppose maternal well-being during pandemic eras currently and in the future. 

https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9883834/

https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28757456/


HYPOTHESIS: What is your main hypothesis/predictions about what the answer to your question is? Briefly explain your thinking. (2-3 sentences)

Increased stress and mental health challenges faced by pregnant individuals during the Covid-19 pandemic negatively impacted pregnancy outcomes. We arrived at our prediction by considering the radical effect of the Covid-19 pandemic on an individual’s emotional and mental well being. We also paired this with the already existing stress that a woman faces throughout her pregnancy, and came up with our hypothesis.     

DATA: Here, you are to think about and describe the ideal dataset (or datasets) you would need to answer this question:

What variables would you have/measure?
On whom/what would they be measured/collected?
Is there a specific time period that's important? If yes, describe what the time period is and why.
etc.
Note: For the project proposal, you do NOT have to find the actual dataset(s) needed for your project. We want you to consider what dataset you would really want to answer this question perfectly, even if such data do not exist. For the first checkpoint and onward, you will find and work with available data.

Variables: Mental health indicators (e.g., levels of stress, anxiety, depression), pregnancy outcomes (e.g., gestational age at birth, birth weight, any complications), Covid-19 impact metrics (e.g., infection status, lockdown impact),  major pandemic events timelines (e.g., start of lockdowns, vaccine rollouts).

Population: Pregnant individuals during the COVID-19 pandemic, with a comparison group from before the pandemic as a baseline.

Time Period: Data should span from before the COVID-19 pandemic (as a baseline) and continue through the pandemic, ideally with timestamps to align with major pandemic events for dynamic analysis.

https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/yeganehbavafa/mental-health-in-the-pregnancy-during-the-covid-19/data:
This dataset from the Pregnancy during the COVID-19 Pandemic (PdP) project includes variables such as maternal age, household income, maternal education levels, Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale (EPDS) scores, PROMIS Anxiety scores, gestational age at birth, delivery date, birth length and weight, delivery mode, NICU stay, survey language, and perceived threat levels to life and unborn baby due to COVID-19. These variables offer comprehensive insights into the socio-economic, psychological, and health-related aspects of pregnant individuals' experiences during the pandemic, allowing for a multifaceted analysis of the impact of COVID-19 on pregnancy outcomes.


ETHICS & PRIVACY: Acknowledge and address any ethics & privacy-related issues of your question(s), proposed dataset(s), and/or analyses. Use the information provided in lecture to guide your group discussion and thinking. If you need further guidance, check out Deon's Ethics Checklist. In particular:

Are there any biases/privacy/terms of use issues with the data you proposed?
Are there potential biases in your dataset(s), in terms of who it composes, and how it was collected, that may be problematic in terms of it allowing for equitable analysis? (For example, does your data exclude particular populations, or is it likely to reflect particular human biases in a way that could be a problem?)
How will you set out to detect these specific biases before, during, and after/when communicating your analysis?
Are there any other issues related to your topic area, data, and/or analyses that are potentially problematic in terms of data privacy and equitable impact?
How will you handle issues you identified?
(1-2 paragraphs)

The dataset from the Pregnancy during the COVID-19 Pandemic (PdP) project might exhibit biases such as geographic concentration (limited to Canada, possibly not reflecting experiences in other healthcare systems or cultures), socio-economic and educational disparities (respondents may skew towards certain income or education levels based on survey reach and accessibility), and potential language barriers (despite survey language options, nuances in understanding or expression may affect responses). For the variables which we used such as Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale and the PROMIS Anxiety score those are both established statistical measurements in research which have already gotten consent from participants to not only partake in the research but to give permission to publish the findings, so though we are looking at their numerical measurements we’ve ensured the ethics and privacy of those numbers. To address these, analyzing demographic data against wider population statistics and considering the socio-cultural context in interpretations will be important. The only issues about privacy that could come up would be mental health information of the individuals. 





TEAM EXPECTATIONS: Read over the COGS108 Team Policies individually. Then, include your group’s expectations of one another for successful completion of your COGS108 project below. Discuss and agree on what all of your expectations are. Discuss how your team will communicate throughout the quarter and consider how you will communicate respectfully should conflicts arise. By including each member’s name above and by adding their name to the submission, you are indicating that you have read the COGS108 Team Policies, accept your team’s expectations below, and have every intention to fulfill them. These expectations are for your team’s use and benefit — they won’t be graded for their details.

For your project team's expectations, it's agreed that there should be equal effort from all members. The team plans to meet once a week in person for discussions and updates on the project's progress. 

PROJECT TIMELINE PROPOSAL: Specify your team's specific project timeline. An example timeline has been provided. Change the dates, times, names, and details to fit your group's plan.

February 23rd - attend OH to get approval for new project idea
February 25th - Complete Checkpoint #1, Rewriting the project proposal, discord call as a group
February 26th - March 1st: Have team meeting(s) in person to work on the project, attend OH for any questions about the data 
March 10th - Complete Checkpoint #2
March 11th - March 15th: Have a team meeting in person to finalize the project, attend OH if needed
March 15th - Complete the Final Project Report, Have a meeting to review the report
March 20th - Submit all project work and secure the A 😎

If you think you will need any special resources or training outside what we have covered in COGS 108 to solve your problem, then your proposal should state these clearly. For example, if you have selected a problem that involves implementing multiple neural networks, please state this so we can make sure you know what you’re doing and so we can point you to resources you will need to implement your project. Note that you are not required to use outside methods.

To reemphasize: for the Project Proposal you are not expected to have already done any analyses for the proposed project, but what you submit should be a plan for what you will answer and what data you would ideally have for the project. (Of course, for the final project you will need to actually find the data and do the analyses.)


